well hello everybody tonight's the
public observing evening at the
University of Cambridge and so we're
going to be looking at the parade of
planets that has been so widely talked
about in the media and I've set a little
planetarium show up it's only 15 minutes
just to have a whiz round the planets
and show you where they are and talk a
little bit about them so I'm going to
set things moving and we'll take a look
over to Wards the sun over the
countryside here this is based in the UK
so 52° North anywhere else is probably
pretty similar if you're on the same
latitude I'm letting time run forward
now and the Sun is going to head down
towards the horizon and that will
disappear as the colors of sunset begin
to flood the sky we'll see the sun dive
below the Horizon and the moment it has
disappeared here we are I'll bring that
to a halt because we're going to go look
at the parade of the planets so I've
drawn in the orange line which is the
plane of the solar system and right next
to that we have the first one of our
tour and that's the planet Mercury a
small planet orbits the sun closest of
all and is therefore quite bright
actually relatively near to the Earth
gets a lot of sunshine so it's lit up
quite brightly it's showing about 3/4
phase towards us at the moment if we
zoom in a bit bit further we can see
some of the craters that it's covered in
it has a very very thin atmosphere um
but no significant erosion and so
gradually
craters made by infalling space rocks
are created and then there's no erosion
to go and rub them out so that's Mercury
very very hard to see very difficult
it's right in the Twilight only about uh
less than 10° above the Horizon at this
point and you've only got a few minutes
it's halfast 6 in the evening here uh
where I've brought this to a stop even
more tricky to spot at the moment is
Saturn CU it's even lower down which is
pretty much the last chance for the year
here's the planet as it would look with
a small telescope with a few of its
moons of course uh the labels don't show
up in your telescope you have to figure
those out for yourself so we'll take
those away zoom in a bit further onto
the planet and you can see the disc of
the planet with some of the Cloud belts
and the Rings but the Rings are becoming
almost Edge on in fact in a month's time
they will be Edge on towards the Earth
due to the different um tilts of our
orbit and Saturn's orbit and the
inclination of the planets it all lines
up so that we get an edge on view and
the Rings being so thin will disappear
what you can see though some of the
moons uh this is Titan nearly as big as
the planet Mercury and if this orbited
the sun we would call it a planet once
thought to be the largest of the moons
in the solar system but that's because
of that thick orange smoggy atmosphere
that you can see the rocky body is a
little bit smaller actually than the
moon ganim that orbits Jupiter we'll see
that as we go on in our tour so those
two very close to the Horizon just above
them the next planet vers is Neptune now
this is really tricky to find it's not
very bright you can't see it at all with
the naked eye even on a good day in a
nice dark situation but with all this
Twilight that there is I'm afraid be
very very tricky to find it if you do
you need a powerful telescope to see
anything other than a point of light you
might just see a dot in binoculars but
uh it's so far away that even a 14in
reflector like the one that I use has a
real hard time sh it as anything other
than a pale blue dot you can see the
moon Triton there that's next to it um
that's really quite bright and was
discovered just about a week after the
planet itself so once Neptune had been
pinned down Triton was obvious um it's
just
uh covered in pink snow carbon monoxide
ice nitrogen ice very similar in fact to
Pluto Pluto is now being classified as a
dwarf planet as you no doubt be aware U
and we'll have a look at Pluto later on
so that's uh Neptune and its Moon Triton
now those guys really quite difficult to
see so this business about see7 planets
in the sky I think You' have to be very
lucky to do that um they're so low that
your horizon could well be blocked um or
full of dirt and dust and clouds and
Sunshine from the sunset be very
difficult indeed what I've done here is
let time run forward and swing to a
straight up view a fisheye lens and I'm
going to show you some of the
constellations that are up there for you
to go and navigate around we've got Ursa
Major The Great Bear and the little bear
Ursa Minor got Aion there with a rion's
belt those three stars that's very
prominent at the moment and then the
constellations of the zodiac following
that orange line following the path of
the planets across the sky we got Pisces
Aries Taurus Gemini and then we have
cancer followed by Leo the Lion and
lastly just visible peeping up above the
Horizon is the face of Virgo now uh this
is at about 9:00 at night we are here so
as time goes on that the uh
constellations you can see will move
across the sky some will set and others
will rise just about to set we have the
planet
Venus incredibly bright at the moment I
was looking at it last night over the
roof of the observatory building and it
was
fantastic it's coming round on its orbit
interior to us between us in the Sun
moving catching up with us and Getting
Thinner as it does so as more and more
of the lit face is turned away from us
it will Disappear Completely once it
gets uh across
to the point where we're looking
straight at the night side but at the
moment it's very close to us and very
shiny with all those clouds in the
atmosphere so it's reflecting a lot of
light back to us off just that thin
cresant of course the uh nearer it gets
to us the bigger it is so the brighter
it becomes as well so it's just past its
brightest I think at the moment so
that's Venus there and again you will
see it even in the Twilight as a very
bright object moving up into the
constellation of Taurus high up above
our heads we have the face of Taurus the
Bull but we have the giant planet
Jupiter Jupiter is an amazing object to
look at with a telescope a small scope
we'll show it like this with the disc of
the planet looking a bit fatter across
its equator than it is pole to pole and
with the dark dust Lanes across the
middle those dark um Cloud belts but at
the moment when we picked a good time to
look at Jupiter because we can see the
Great Red Spot there a hurricane that's
been raging for 400 years at least since
Galileo first turned a telescope to the
sky just peeping out to the left is one
of Jupiter's moons one of the smaller
ones but crossing the face is this one
this is IO and IO is the most volcanic
place we know all those black circles
and black marks those are volcanic
eruptions where Sal
is being spewed out onto the surface and
in fact the colors there are all the
colors of sulfur caused by the tidal
effect of being so close to Jupiter and
the interaction with its sister moons H
these three here we're going to look at
the second moon out that's called Europa
and Europa are very different looking
very shiny if you see the two moons you
will notice that IO looks yellow and
Europa white so you can actually tell
which one's which covered in ice
probably with a liquid water ocean and
maybe even a biosphere of living
organisms swimming around in that ocean
we just don't know
yet next one out is ganim this is the
largest moon in the solar system very
slightly larger than Titan and Saturn uh
bigger than the planet Mercury
definitely would be called a planet if
it orbited around the
Sun mixed terrain some glaciers flowing
on the surface quite a lot of ice
possibly some liquid water as well
underneath that
ice and then the last of the
moons Kalisto and Kalisto is very
different it's geologically inactive
dead and covered in impact craters all
of the moons get hit by space rocks
falling in making craters but gradually
on the others they're all rubbed out by
the geological processes the glaciers
and the volcanoes and so forth but
Kalisto being so far from Jupiter has
died and uh stopped having any of that
activity and so the craters have just
been building up and up and up more and
more of them as time has gone on running
the clock forward again now towards uh
later in the evening and that will allow
us to then look at the next object which
is the planet Uranus just a bit
below on the boundary between Aries and
Taurus at the moment we have the little
green dot of the planet Uranus now it's
always very tricky to find you need a
lot of magnification to find Uranus and
indeed Neptune otherwise they're so far
away they just look like faint stars but
the slight green color gives this one
away see my video about there not not
being any green stars for
details um so here it is only Voyager to
has ever visited Uranus and Neptune it
discovered that both the outer planets
have these thin systems of rings and
took some photographs now it didn't get
to do very close flybys of the moons of
Uranus and we really don't have very
great images of them as a result it
wasn't possible to fly the spacecraft
onto Neptune and do a close flyby one of
the better photographs is this one which
is Titania and they look a bit like they
are geologically active possibly again
ice worlds with a liquid water ocean but
because we don't have the data they
don't get very much attention these days
so a mission out to the outer planets
should really try and uh study these in
more detail it would be very interesting
indeed so I'm going to let time run on
you'll see those constellations of
Pisces Aries and Taurus heading down
towards the horizon the other planets
will set Jupiter there very very bright
we'll bring it to a stop just as Jupiter
is about to get to the tree and go
further up because we have the last of
the major planets on this parade and
that's Mars the red planet and it's
right in the middle there of the
constellations of the Heavenly twins
Gemini you can see that it's got a
couple of moons Phobos and deos fear and
Terror and those are named appropriately
since Mars is the God of War the dark
marking in the center that's the ctis
major very prominent feature if that's
facing towards us you get to see it very
nicely could just about make out the
polar cap at the top there I'm want to
see of the other dark markings and uh uh
different colored Rusty desert
regions quite small in a telescope even
though it's at its nearest Mars is quite
a small planet and you do need a fairly
significant telescope to able to really
get some good images um and good views
of
Mars so there it is in the middle of
Gemini look the twins holding hands um
above Orion and with that orange line
marking out the plane of the solar
system where you tend to find the
planets they're not all perfectly
aligned as you can see there um Mars is
a little bit off um each of the planets
has its own orbit around the Sun but
they're broadly speaking in a fairly
flat disc so we're going to let time run
on into the morning Sky now and uh that
will see Mars disappear down below the
Horizon and just before it does so we're
going to Pivot away there it goes going
to Pivot away over to the Eastern side
of the sky and we'll uh just visit one
more object that doesn't get a
mention because of its demotion and
that's Pluto so where's Pluto well here
it is very faint indeed I have never
managed to track it down with a
telescope it's uh right on the limit of
what's possible in the conditions that I
have and there's Pluto its Moon Sharon
and the other four moons Cerberus NYX
Hydra and sticks there which go around
but Pluto and Sharon blown up here they
orbit round the Common Center of mass
which isn't inside either of them
they're more of a binary system uh
rather than a planet and a moon although
Pluto's been demoted to this dwarf
planet status and a lot of That's Got to
Do with the fact it really really is
Tiny it's 1500th the mass of the Earth
which makes it a tenth the mass of our
moon something like that and it really
is a small space Rock so um it uh was
detected originally and predicted
through the idea that it was perturbing
the outer planet in their path but it
wasn't it's too small to be able to do
that um and that was all down to errors
in the estimates of the masses of some
of the major planets so that's it for
tonight and I hope you've enjoyed that